Thank you.
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
C.O.
Smith, Texas A&M class of 1950, is proud of the role that the United States Coast Guard played in World War II on board the Coast Guard Cutter Bramble.
Smith spent the most part of four years at sea, almost making it to Europe before mechanical problems sent them to Puerto Rico to dry dock.
and then through the Panama Canal to the Pacific and Alaska, where his crew supplied Navy Seabees who were building the Loran stations.
You'll learn more about those as you meet C.O.
Smith O'Brien today on Veterans of the Valley.
Pleasure to have you here.
Thank you for your service, Mr. Smith.
You graduated from Wichita Falls High School in 1942, went to Midwestern for a year, and then to the Coast Guard in 1943.
Talk about your path to the Coast Guard and what sent you there.
Well, at that time, when you went through, everyone was going through the draft board, and so they divided us up, I mean, wherever they wanted us.
So myself and two or three from our area sent us to Coast Guard.
Went to what they call Treasure Island in Oakland, San Francisco Bay Area, boot camp, and had a beginning there, but out of that,
I don't know why I was selected to go to the Coast Guard Academy.
I think it was because I was familiar with equipment, machines.
I'd rebuilt a car myself, a Model T Ford, as parts.
And I guess that came out that I knew something about tools.
So I became a diesel manufacturer.
engine and diesel electric engine expert in about three months.
Well, you were a prime candidate and you graduated the top of your class, but you were too young to be an officer because you weren't 21 yet.
You were what?
Only 18 years old.
About 18 and a half.
19.
Right, right.
So you're an apprentice seaman, which is?
Apprentice is the lowest you can go when you first go in.
Right.
To a motor machinist for my first class.
The equivalent of a master sergeant?
Yeah.
In the Army?
Is that right?
So I got that promotion and didn't realize that I was in charge when it came to being aboard ship and had these big old diesel engines to go.
Right.
About 40 to 50 feet long.
So it wasn't long before you were going to go off to war, and the deployment was going to be to Europe, from the East Coast to Europe, but something happened along the way.
So talk about that.
Well, we caught the bramble, put aboard it.
It was made in Duluth, Minnesota, and came down through the Great Lakes, down through St.
Lawrence, and then we actually boarded it in New York.
and went down then and outfitted at Fort Eustis, Virginia area.
And we didn't know it, but when we first took out, we found out we were at sea and there were hundreds of ships half a mile or a mile apart as far as you could see.
And we were doing submarine duty on the invasion fleet going to Europe.
And that went real well until we got about to the middle of the Atlantic and we had a hurricane.
that they didn't know about, or the timing was where everybody went.
Our sister ship became disabled, lost its propulsion, and so whoever was in charge had us to take it under tow, and then we went out because there was a defect in the bearings of the propulsion.
So you were towing it, and then the bramble went out.
And, of course, we were in that storm,
And I didn't realize it that the captain thought we were going to both get sunk because we'd get together in that storm and just destroy each other.
But luckily, I got up on deck since I was the deck below and I could see we were about 10 feet apart, but never did touch.
But we had to stay there for 10 days to get somebody to us.
In fact, the storm went on for about
Another six days until the hurricane all passed.
It was really a joy ride there.
You were just alone, just at the whim of the storm.
It went on, of course.
First thing I thought, well, we're really good submarine bait, but we were small and insignificant compared to the forces that were going on to Europe.
Right.
But our ship, they towed it.
They found out there wasn't dry dock facilities for it, which was necessary to get all this taken care of, and they sent us to Puerto Rico.
They told you, this Navy tug told you to Puerto Rico.
The large Navy tug told us all the way.
That was a long trip.
It was a couple of weeks getting us there.
Right.
And then we were there about six weeks.
Waiting for your boat to get finished.
When that was done, then we took off for the Panama Canal, and I didn't know where since my job was in the engine room, but I took off Pacific then.
Right.
Of course, later you would, we'll talk about this, later your career would be in landscape architecture, so when you were in Puerto Rico, that was kind of a nice place to be for your interest, right?
Yeah, I enjoyed it fine.
I had a lot of great experiences to see in all these plants that I'd been reading about, even
at that time that we didn't grow in Texas.
So I enjoyed it there.
And the only problem is we hadn't gotten paid in about three months.
And it was about three months later before we ever got paid.
We had to do things we didn't spend money on.
And we enjoyed that.
So you had 10 days at sea, then towed to Puerto Rico about another six weeks there.
And then your deployment completely changed.
You weren't going to Europe anymore.
Right.
Whatever it was, we were sent through the Panama Canal.
And I had to wait a few days after we got to the entrance.
before our time came to go through.
And after we got through, then we took off and ended up eventually in San Francisco before we were sent on out to Hawaii the first time.
Interesting thing coming up from the Panama Canal one evening, a Mexican fisherman had a whole load of fish, I guess, but he was up in the deck
lay in a piston and my captain thought he was disabled so we took him in tow and towed him all night long the next morning we were just entering the san diego bay the guy came up waving his engine was running found out that was a con deal so fish one did he got a free ride all night asleep but he pulled up and gave us three great big tuna fish for
For letting him con you, right?
Yeah.
Well, that wasn't a bad trade-off.
No, for us it wasn't.
You said that one time you thought that you'd encountered an enemy sub, but it turned out not to be that.
No, we made one run.
The incidents were like a
Lieutenant second class and they make a lot of mistakes and he thought we had a sub and we really made a raid on it, shot our depth charges and hedgehogs and all that stuff.
I look back and we saw we sunk a half submerged barrel.
But you blew the heck out of it.
We got the experience anyway.
That's right, you got some good target practice on that.
One thing, and you may have mentioned this before, you did to me, was that through all of this, this was a good deployment for you because you didn't get seasick.
Never did.
Even in the 10 days at sea?
No.
That was going to serve you well later on because you'd get some pretty rough waters later on.
For some reason, I don't know why.
We were in a lot of bad water later on.
Yeah.
Well, you're spending nearly four years in the water, so that's good for you.
Talk about your assignment to Alaska and sort of what it involved.
Obviously, people know that it was the Navy Seabees' job to build stuff for the war, whether they be
runways or whatever they were for World War II.
And one of the things that they built were these Loran stations.
Talk about what is a Loran station and what your all's duty was as far as supplying these.
Well, that was the first radio directional station.
Any kind of thing.
It's like a microwave.
It was an early microwave thing that were built.
And those were going to be used for us for Dulo and all those that
when they bombed Japan.
And we had a whole series of those on out in Alaska, out in the middle of the Gulf, and then on up out on more of the islands.
And then we built one up between the Russia and the United States on the Pribilof Island.
And so we were supplying them because they were alone, these guys that were doing that work.
And they worked through the winter
I never did ever see what the temperature was, but I know the seawater was freezing and we were told if we hit the water it would maybe last a minute
Right.
Because it's that cold.
But I never thought we had a job to do.
I never thought about that.
You were talking about one crew of sea bees that you encountered that you had something that they really wanted.
It was amazing.
We came in.
We had a sea.
We were also an icebreaker.
We could go through about three foot of ice.
In fact, they're still using those old ships today to cleat the oil fields.
up the oil fields north of alaska now right the navy has a large uh um nuclear one that does the heavy work and then those others just keep going back keeping it clear so they get in but we had supply this autumn privilof islands that's halfway between russia united states way up north i don't know how cold it was but we had to break ice to get in there and i took the barge in
was loaded with supplies and on top of it were some crates of oranges.
And the poor guys had been working there all winter.
I don't know whether they were out of supplies, but they sure hadn't had anything for citrus or anything like that.
They saw those oranges, they reached down, jumped aboard and just those wooden crates of orange, like they just tore them apart and started eating oranges, peeling seeds and all because they hadn't had anything.
and they were almost the point of scurvy.
So the vitamin C involved was something that they wanted.
It was quite an experience there to see nature at work with all the seals and sea lions.
You could just walk out among them.
You were told by the Eskimos and also by the guys that were working on them not to bother them.
We found out they ate them all the time, but they would grab one of them's ear and go behind
kind of a doom there, then club it to kill it.
They never let any of the population see them kill another animal.
Right.
So they were all friendly, just like puppy dogs almost, those great old big things.
Some of the waters that you encountered, just to say that it was rough, would be a vast understatement.
I mean, the way you describe it, you're talking about 90-foot swales and things like this.
To see pictures of the crab industry going on there, they lose ships every year.
But we were going
over one wave and down through another one with a 190 foot, 96 foot ship and 90 foot waves.
Just like a roller coaster almost.
Were there times you thought you'd be covered up or capsized?
I mean, I know it was a great boat.
It was built for that kind of abuse.
We were watertight, top and bottom.
And I knew we'd float, but it was really rough.
There were times you had to hang on.
Right.
My problem is that I got hungry and nobody else did.
Because you weren't getting seasick.
No, I wasn't getting seasick.
I finally got the cook out of bed and he came up to the galley and he got a can of tomatoes and some saltine crackers and threw him at me and he said, if you can have that, I ain't coming back.
And that's what I had to eat for about five or six days.
Now you told me one time about that the bramble went the wrong side of a buoy and hit a boulder, cut a hole in it.
You had just gotten off duty.
And this was during the cold time, right?
In the winter time.
We had gone back to Kitchikan to get supplies and going north in probably an area that ships don't go now because it was smaller.
It's like going between a mountain and on waterways.
Again, this...
A lieutenant read the buoy wrong and went the wrong way and hit a giant boulder.
Then we knocked a hole about big enough to drive a car through in our main freight area.
The captain, I had just gone to bed.
I'd been on duty all night in the engine room.
And so abandoned ship came on.
And I ran up on the deck and came out the hatch on the deck and my feet just froze to the deck because it was probably 30 or 40 degrees below zero.
Right.
You were barefooted?
Barefooted.
Yeah, because you just got off duty.
I just had skivvies on.
Yeah, that's right.
You were in for the night.
I didn't know what was going on.
Something was going on.
I felt the big hit.
Well...
Captain happened to be on the bridge way up above me and he saw me and says, Smitty, stand there, don't move.
And he threw me down his heavy parker.
And he said, put that on and don't move until you feel your feet give way and then jump over on the piling and we'll get you then.
And lucky they were able to fix the hatches that were exposed.
have to hold back the water with some extra board.
It didn't break through into other parts of the ship.
And we went back in Canada to a dry dock there to get that.
Because if you tried to break loose in that situation, you might have ripped your feet off.
And pulled all the skin off.
All the skin, yeah.
So that was good advice.
Yeah, very good.
Yeah, because I could see a panic sort of coming in when you're like that.
Yeah.
The base in Seward, Alaska, that was in the Western Gulf, and you were the only military there, right?
Yeah, they had thought Japan was going to try to come overland, and they did, but at the time we got to Alaska, they were still fighting out on the Aleutians driving them out, which we lost thousands of people, young men out there, because the Japanese weren't prepared for winter, and our guys weren't either, and they were fighting in that kind of weather.
finally the Japanese just left and we moved right behind them so we could build Loran stations.
Let's go to some pictures that you have supplied and some other pictures that we got off of the United States Coast Guard website and let's go to some pictures and there's
There's a young one.
How old were you?
You were a teenager, right?
I had turned 18 just before I went in the service.
So that was my first leave in San Francisco.
Went into the studio so I could get my mama a picture.
That's good.
You talked about the fishing.
This is a halibut?
Yeah, a halibut.
We didn't have anyone supplying us.
A captain was not a GI, really a GI, so we learned to hunt and fish.
Right.
We caught halibut salmon.
We made our own fishing gear out of welding rods.
We could throw them across streams and pull in, catch three-foot salmon.
And that's a relatively small one right there.
That one, I had some that'd be almost as tall as me, and we caught these right off the ship while we were docked there in Seward.
And that's you, the proud fisherman there behind it.
One day we caught it.
They called it an electronic evil or something like that.
It was about 12 feet long.
I caught it and got it up on the deck.
And all of a sudden that thing took out of us like a snake.
Luckily the captain happened to see us and he's the only one who had a pistol and he took care of its part.
But it had fangs like everything.
But we got to hunt and fish.
We didn't have a vehicle except there was one
little bar in town and he had a jeep that let us bar it sometime because we were the only people, the only customers.
There's a picture that you have in your album of the Bramble.
Later on we've got a little bit more modern pictures of the same boat.
It was heavily built.
It had a double
keel in the front so you could run up on ice and crush the ice.
That's the way an icebreaker works.
And so you had a double keel to run up on.
Our fastest speed was about 12 miles an hour.
We went a lot of places at 12 miles an hour.
Here you are hard at work.
Is that you in the middle?
Oh, yeah.
That's in Waikiki.
Waikiki Beach right in front of the old pink hotel there.
Right.
Back there.
Just before we took off for Alaska, we stopped there.
Well, we made one run out of there south to the equator.
That's probably the warmest you were for the next several years right there.
This one run we made right quick.
It was a whole...
Our whole ship was loaded with beer for those working to shoot the atomic bomb off down there.
You were a popular ship.
Yeah, they were glad to see us.
And there's two pictures side by side.
The bow.
The other front there.
And at times that whole front would just go underneath the wave.
We'd just float like a cork.
come up and go like a roller coaster down the next wave.
Good thing you didn't get seasick.
It would have been a rough tour of duty.
Everyone some way got up to take their duty because we had to keep going to supply these people and it was like they're all winter months and the winter months are about
nine months long up there.
I told you, the little lady that had a garden right next to where we usually dock, I saw her planting potatoes, orange potatoes, where you cut a potato and plant it.
And we were gone about six weeks and came back.
And she was harvesting potatoes.
And I got to talk to her because she helped us in the USO that we established there.
They were about, almost some of them a foot around in six weeks' time.
And I asked her about, make a lot of good fried potatoes.
She said, no, you can't fry them.
They're so full of water.
We just have to bake them and mash them and do them that way.
But they're very, you know, they're summer just so short, everything grows fast.
Exactly.
This was, uh,
You're there in the front.
That was our leisure time.
That was your leisure time.
Since we were at sea, that was our nightlife, our daylife.
Right.
That's when we were off duty.
Okay.
But we'd be seeing sharks, all kinds of things.
Yeah, whales.
All kinds of whales up there.
I got to go up to Alaska on a cruise a couple of years ago, so I got a little taste of what you got to see all the time.
Now, this is one of the photos that I got off of the Coast Guard website.
This is the bramble right there.
And you can see its ability to cut right through the ice.
Now, those are just little ice cubes compared to some of the stuff that you cut through.
Oh, yeah.
It was solid.
That's easy stuff.
We could go through solid.
If it was three foot thick, we could break through it.
Had such a giant, large, looked like it was all brass propeller in the back, probably about
I don't know, 12 foot in diameter.
And it would just chew up the ice behind us then.
So we left a Navajo trail when we went through there.
It was like a blender in the way it worked.
There's another photograph of it.
That's probably when it was reconditioned some.
They took some of the towers there at the head off of it.
It slowed us down, I'm sure.
Quite a vessel.
It was so heavily built, heavier steel than most ships because it had to withstand all that ice pressure there.
Right.
And this was, you said that you're in this picture, you're in the top row of the far right.
Yeah, top right.
We were celebrating a victory over Europe day.
Right.
We'd gotten word, finally, we didn't have
radios to listen to or even newspapers to get and finally the captain some way found out or they told us when we came into the dock in Seward about we'd had victory in Europe and that's our crew we all were celebrating.
Celebrating that.
Got a couple of pictures here.
This is an example of one of the Loran stations.
You may or may not have worked on this station.
You worked on a while.
I'm sure.
That looks like going out the illusion chain.
There were a lot of volcanoes working off.
I told you one day we went through a volcano that was really going off and so much ash.
We thought it stopped up our engines, but when I got down into the bottom of the belge of the ship to undo our
Filters opened it up and it was packed full of sardines.
We'd run through a school of sardines and it sucked them in and it actually would stop the ship.
We couldn't cool the engines down anymore.
So we had a ship full of sardines to clean up after that.
There's the same station.
This particular one is at an island called Uta, U-T-T-A, part of the Aleutians.
That looks like them.
You don't have palm trees there.
Exactly.
At all.
Yeah, yeah.
It's frozen most of the time.
That's true.
So that's an example of these Aloran stations that you supplied the Seabees as they built them.
About the time that you got the last one built, you and things were headed for Japan for what was anticipated, a ground war.
That's when the bomb dropped on Hiroshima.
Yeah, we had left Alaska and were going back to Honolulu for whatever.
Right.
To catch up with them probably.
And the war had gotten stopped because the bomb had been dropped by the time we went from Aleutians down to Honolulu.
Right.
And so I'd been in there long enough that I got
I was ready to go home to Mama pretty quick.
And I got mustered out pretty soon.
My ship went on that time.
I knew it was going on to Singapore to reset all the buoys, because we had a big boom that could lift 100,000 pounds and pull these deep sea buoys off the bottom of the ocean, because it had grown with all the growth to where it almost sunk the ship.
We did some going up the coast in the United States.
That was my job to run that thing, and we'd turn that ship almost to where the kennel was, down to the water for it to break loose, and it was just like a big top when it did break loose.
Right.
Because it was stuck to the bottom with all this growth from that, and they went on, but I said I was ready to go home to Mama.
They did offer me to send me back to Coast Guard Academy for a full career.
But I hadn't seen Mama in four years.
I was ready to go.
So in 1945, you did go back home to Wichita Falls.
And you wanted to go to school to study landscape architecture.
A&M didn't have such a program at the time, right?
They didn't have professors at that time.
Right.
So you went to the University of Oklahoma for a small time.
My best friend.
I thought he was my best friend.
Was going to the University of Oklahoma.
So I went with him up there and happened to meet an Aggie up there that was going to be head of the department that the University of Oklahoma was going to
And he taught me just going ahead and enrolling, which I did.
Right.
But about the middle of the year, they decided not to.
So I packed up and headed for A&M.
Headed for A&M.
Yeah.
And you came down and, of course, having already served, you had the option of whether to be in the Corps or not.
But you decided to enter the Corps and you got a regular Army commission and were captain in the reserve, right?
Since it was midterm, well, they housed us in the Corps.
dorms because that's all the room they had.
And since I've been in the Corps, they offered me that and I could get a regular army commission too, which gave a little extra money beside the GI thing there.
So I had more money in my pocket than I've ever had in my life, which is probably 10 or $15 a month.
But I enjoyed the Corps and ended up commanding officer of our unit on the senior year.
They accepted, the young guys accepted the veterans fine.
And since we've been in leadership for more than what most of them had, we seemed to filter up into that.
So we enjoyed that very much.
We're just about out of time, but after you graduated from Texas A&M, you went into your dad's business and the family landscape business and kept that going as a matter of fact.
Hill Country Landscapes in Austin, you owned and operated that and your son still does, right?
I got out of town so he could run the business.
I found out that's what dads have to do sometimes.
So I'm having fun at A&M again.
Exactly.
You are.
And you also worked for the highway department.
You had a lot to do with when we go down the highway and we see these roadside parks with the teepees and things like that.
You had a lot to do with construction and making them.
When we built the interstates, I was a landscape architect with the highway department and designed the roadside parks.
Before that, I was a landscape architect.
For the city of Austin, I did work along Town Lake and built a botanical garden at Joker Park.
Right.
Things that are still going.
It was a wonderful career, and you married Martha in 1951?
Yeah, changed my life.
Indeed, indeed.
Well, congratulations on that, and thank you for your service.
It's remarkable.
I think you might be the first Coast Guard veteran that we've had on the show.
It's a remarkable story.
There wasn't many, and I didn't know what to expect.
But in those days, we didn't question what we were going to do.
We just did it.
We're out of time.
Thank you for your service.
Thank you.
Martha and C.O.
Smith have been married more than 58 years now, and his is a fascinating story of his Coast Guard service near War's End.
Coast Guardsmen served in every theater of operation in World War II.
Many don't know that it was the Coast Guard that captured the first German prisoner of the war.
We salute C.O.
Smith for his service as we do all veterans.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.